The Frog King
*
In olden times when wishing still helped one, there lived a king
whose daughters were all beautiful, but the youngest was so beautiful
that the sun itself, which has seen so much, was astonished whenever
it shone in her face.  Close by the king's castle lay a great dark
forest, and under an old lime-tree in the forest was a well, and when
the day was very warm, the king's child went out into the forest and
sat down by the side of the cool fountain, and when she was bored she
took a golden ball, and threw it up on high and caught it, and this
ball was her favorite plaything.
*
Now it so happened that on one occasion the princess's golden ball
did not fall into the little hand which she was holding up for it,
but on to the ground beyond, and rolled straight into the water.  The
king's daughter followed it with her eyes, but it vanished, and the
well was deep, so deep that the bottom could not be seen.  At this
she began to cry, and cried louder and louder, and could not be
comforted.  And as she thus lamented someone said to her, "What ails
you, king's daughter?  You weep so that even a stone would show pity."
*
She looked round to the side from whence the voice came, and saw a
frog stretching forth its big, ugly head from the water.  "Ah, old
water-splasher, is it you," she said, "I am weeping for my golden ball,
which has fallen into the well."  "Be quiet, and do not weep," answered
the frog, "I can help you, but what will you give me if I bring your
plaything up again?"  "Whatever you will have, dear frog," said she, "My
clothes, my pearls and jewels, and even the golden crown which I am
wearing."  The frog answered, "I do not care for your clothes, your
pearls and jewels, nor for your golden crown, but if you will love me
and let me be your companion and play-fellow, and sit by you at your
little table, and eat off your little golden plate, and drink out of
your little cup, and sleep in your little bed - if you will promise
me this I will go down below, and bring you your golden ball up
again."
*
"Oh yes," said she, "I promise you all you wish, if you will but bring
me my ball back again."  But she thought, "How the silly frog does
talk.  All he does is to sit in the water with the other frogs, and
croak.  He can be no companion to any human being."
*
But the frog when he had received this promise, put his head into the
water and sank down; and in a short while came swimmming up again
with the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the grass.  The king's
daughter was delighted to see her pretty plaything once more, and
picked it up, and ran away with it.  "Wait, wait," said the frog.  "Take
me with you.  I can't run as you can."  But what did it avail him to
scream his croak, croak, after her, as loudly as he could.  She did
not listen to it, but ran home and soon forgot the poor frog, who was
forced to go back into his well again.
*
The next day when she had seated herself at table with the king and
all the courtiers, and was eating from her little golden plate,
something came creeping splish splash, splish splash, up the marble
staircase, and when it had got to the top, it knocked at the door and
cried, "Princess, youngest princess, open the door for me."  She ran to
see who was outside, but when she opened the door, there sat the frog
in front of it.  Then she slammed the door to, in great haste, sat
down to dinner again, and was quite frightened.  The king saw plainly
that her heart was beating violently, and said, "My child, what are
you so afraid of?  Is there perchance a giant outside who wants to
carry you away?"  "Ah, no," replied she.  "It is no giant but a disgusting
frog."
*
"What does a frog want with you?"  "Ah, dear father, yesterday as I was
in the forest sitting by the well, playing, my golden ball fell into
the water.  And because I cried so, the frog brought it out again for
me, and because he so insisted, I promised him he should be my
companion, but I never thought he would be able to come out of his
water.  And now he is outside there, and wants to come in to me."
*
In the meantime it knocked a second time, and cried,  "Princess,
youngest princess,  open the door for me,  do you not know what you
said to me yesterday by the cool waters of the well.  Princess,
youngest princess,  open the door for me."
*
Then said the king, "That which you have promised must you perform.
Go and let him in."  She went and opened the door, and the frog hopped
in and followed her, step by step, to her chair. There he sat and
cried, "Lift me up beside you."  She delayed, until at last the king
commanded her to do it.  Once the frog was on the chair he wanted to
be on the table, and when he was on the table he said, "Now, push your
little golden plate nearer to me that we may eat together."  She did
this, but it was easy to see that she did not do it willingly.  The
frog enjoyed what he ate, but almost every mouthful she took choked
her.  At length he said, "I have eaten and am satisfied, now I am
tired, carry me into your little room and make your little silken bed
ready, and we will both lie down and go to sleep."
*
The king's daughter began to cry, for she was afraid of the cold frog
which she did not like to touch, and which was now to sleep in her
pretty, clean little bed.  But the king grew angry and said, "He who
helped you when you were in trouble ought not afterwards to be
despised by you."  So she took hold of the frog with two fingers,
carried him upstairs, and put him in a corner, but when she was in
bed he crept to her and said, "I am tired, I want to sleep as well as
you, lift me up or I will tell your father."  At this she was terribly
angry, and took him up and threw him with all her might against the
wall.  "Now, will you be quiet, odious frog," said she.  But when he
fell down he was no frog but a king's son with kind and beautiful
eyes.  He by her father's will was now her dear companion and
husband.  Then he told her how he had been bewitched by a wicked
witch, and how no one could have delivered him from the well but
herself, and that to-morrow they would go together into his kingdom.
*
Then they went to sleep, and next morning when the sun awoke them, a
carriage came driving up with eight white horses, which had white
ostrich feathers on their heads, and were harnessed with golden
chains, and behind stood the young king's servant Faithful Henry.
Faithful Henry had been so unhappy when his master was changed into a
frog, that he had caused three iron bands to be laid round his heart,
lest it should burst with grief and sadness.  The carriage was to
conduct the young king into his kingdom.  Faithful Henry helped them
both in, and placed himself behind again, and was full of joy because
of this deliverance.  And when they had driven a part of the way the
king's son heard a cracking behind him as if something had broken.
So he turned round and cried, "Henry, the carriage is breaking."
"No, master, it is not the carriage.  It is a band from my heart,
which was put there in my great pain when you were a frog and
imprisoned in the well."  Again and once again while they were on
their way something cracked, and each time the king's son thought the
carriage was breaking, but it was only the bands which were springing
from the heart of Faithful Henry because his master was set free and
was happy.
*
#

Our Lady's Child
*
Hard by a great forest dwelt a wood-cutter with his wife, who had an
only child, a little girl three years old.  They were so poor,
however, that they no longer had daily bread, and did not know how to
get food for her.  One morning the wood-cutter went out sorrowfully
to his work in the forest, and while he was cutting wood, suddenly
there stood before him a tall and beautiful woman with a crown of
shining stars on her head, who said to him 'I am the virgin mary,
mother of the child jesus. You are poor and needy, bring your child
to me, I will take her with me and be her mother, and care for her.'
The wood-cutter obeyed, brought his child, and gave her to the virgin
mary, who took her up to heaven with her.  There the child fared
well, ate sugar-cakes, and drank sweet milk, and her clothes were of
gold, and the little angels played with her.  And when she was
fourteen years of age, the virgin mary called her one day and said
'dear child, I am about to make a long journey, so take into your
keeping the keys of the thirteen doors of heaven.  Twelve of these
you may open, and behold the glory which is within them, but the
thirteenth, to which this little key belongs, is forbidden you.  Take
care not to open it, or you will be unhappy.' The girl promised to be
obedient, and when the virgin mary was gone, she began to examine the
dwellings of the kingdom of heaven.  Each day she opened one of them,
until she had made the round of the twelve. In each of them sat one
of the apostles in the midst of a great light, and she rejoiced in
all the magnificence and splendor, and the little angels who always
accompanied her rejoiced with her. Then the forbidden door alone
remained, and she felt a great desire to know what could be hidden
behind it, and said to the angels 'I will not open it entirely, and I
will not go inside, but I will unlock it so that we can see just a
little through the opening.' 'Oh'no,  said the little angels,  'that
would be a sin.  The virgin mary has forbidden it, and it might
easily cause your unhappiness.' Then she was silent, but the desire
in her heart was not stilled, but gnawed there and tormented her, and
let her have no rest.  And once when the angels had all gone out, she
thought 'now I am quite alone, and I could peep in.  If I do, no one
will ever know.' She sought out the key, and when she had got it in
her hand, she put it in the lock, and when she had put it in, she
turned it round as well.  Then the door sprang open, and she saw
there the trinity sitting in fire and splendor.  She stayed there
awhile, and looked at everything in amazement, then she touched the
light a little with her finger, and her finger became quite golden.
Immediately a great fear fell on her.  She shut the door violently,
and ran hi there.  But her terror would not quit her, let her do what she
'Yes,  said the girl, for the second time. Then she perceived the
finger which had become golden from touching the fire of heaven, and
saw well that the child had sinned, and said for the third time 'have
you not done it.' 'No,  said the girl for the third time.  Then said
the virgin mary 'you have not obeyed me, and besides that you have
lied, you are no longer worthy to be in heaven.' Then the girl fell
into a deep sleep, and when she awoke she lay on the earth below, and
in the midst of a wilderness.  She wanted to cry out, but she could
bring forth no sound.  She sprang up and wanted to run away, but
whithersoever she turned herself, she was continually held back by
thick hedges of thorns through which she could not break.  In the
desert, in which she was imprisoned, there stood an old hollow tree,
and this had to be her dwelling-place.  Into this she crept when
night came, and here she slept.  Here, too, she found a shelter from
might, and her heart beat continually and would not be still, the gold too
stayed on her finger, and  would not go away, let  her rub it and wash  it
never so much. It was not long  before the virgin mary came back from  her
journey.  She called the girl  before her, and asked  to have the keys  of
heaven back.  When the maiden gave  her the bunch, the virgin looked  into
her eyes and said 'have you not opened the thirteenth door also.' 'No, she
replied.  Then she laid her hand on the girl's heart, and felt how it beat
and beat, and  saw right well  that she  had disobeyed her  order and  had
opened the door.  Then she said once again 'are you certain that you  have
not done it.'
*
storm and rain, but it was a miserable life, and bitterly did she
weep when she remembered how happy she had been in heaven, and how
the angels had played with her.  Roots and wild berries were her only
food, and for these she sought as far as she could go.  In the autumn
she picked up the fallen nuts and leaves, and carried them into the
hole.  The nuts were her food in winter, and when snow and ice came,
she crept amongst the leaves like a poor little animal that she might
not freeze.  Before long her clothes were all torn, and one bit of
them after another fell off her.  As soon, however, as the sun shone
warm again, she went out and sat in front of the tree, and her long
hair covered her on all sides like a mantle.  Thus she sat year after
year, and felt the pain and the misery of the world. One day, when
the trees were once more clothed in fresh green, the king of the
country was hunting in the forest, and followed a roe, and as it had
fled into the thicket which shut in this part of the forest, he got
off his horse, tore the bushes asunder, and cut himself a path with
his sword.  When he had at last forced his way through, he saw a
wonderfully beautiful maiden sitting under the tree, and she sat
there and was entirely covered with her golden hair down to her very
feet. He stood still and looked at her full of surprise, then he
spoke to her and said 'who are you.  Why are you sitting here in the
wilderness.' But she gave no answer, for she could not open her
mouth.  The king continued 'will you go with me to my castle.  Then
she just nodded her head a little.  The king took her in his arms,
carried her to his horse, and rode home with her, and when he reached
the royal castle he caused her to be dressed in beautiful garments,
and gave her all things in abundance.  Although she could not speak,
she was still so beautiful and charming that he began to love her
with all his heart, and it was not long before he married her. After
a year or so had passed, the queen brought a son into the world.
Thereupon the virgin mary appeared to her in the night when she lay
in her bed alone, and said 'if you will tell the truth and confess
that you did unlock the forbidden door, I will open your mouth and
give you back your speech, but if you persevere in your sin, and deny
obstinately, I will take your new-born child away with me.' The the
queen was permitted to answer, but she remained hard, and said 'no, I
did not open the forbidden door, and the virgin mary took the
new-born child from her arms, and vanished with it.  Next morning
when the child was not to be found, it was whispered among the people
that the queen was a man-eater, and had put her own child to death.
She heard all this and could say nothing to the contrary, but the
king would not believe it, for he loved her so much. When a year had
gone by the queen again bore a son, and in the night the virgin mary
again came to her, and said 'if you will confess that you opened the
forbidden door, I will give you your child back and untie your tongue
but if you continue in sin and deny it, I will take away with me this
new child also.' Then the queen again said 'no, I did not open the
forbidden door.' And the virgin took the child out of her arms, and
away with her to heaven.  Next morning, when this child also had
disappeared, the people declared quite loudly that the queen had
devoured it, and the king's councillors demanded that she should be
brought to justice.  The king however, loved her so dearly that he
would not believe it, and commanded the councillors under pain of
death not to say any more about it. The following year the queen gave
birth to a beautiful little daughter, and for the third time the
virgin mary appeared to her in the night and said 'follow me.' She
took the queen by the hand and led her to heaven, and showed her
there her two eldest children, who smiled at her, and were playing
with the ball of the world.  When the queen rejoiced thereat, the
virgin mary said 'is your heart not yet softened.  If you will own
that you opened the forbidden door, I will give you back your two
little sons.' But for the third time the queen answered 'no, I did
not open the forbidden door.' Then the virgin let her sink down to
earth once more, and took from her likewise her third child.
*
Next morning, when the loss was reported abroad, all the people cried
loudly 'the queen is a man-eater.  She must be judged, and the king
was no longer able to restrain his councillors. Thereupon a trial was
held, and as she could not answer, and defend herself, she was
condemned to be burnt at the stake. The wood was got together, and
when she was fast bound to the stake, and the fire began to burn
round about her, the hard ice of pride melted, her heart was moved by
repentance, and she thought 'if I could but confess before my death
that I opened the door.' Then her voice came back to her, and she
cried out loudly 'yes, mary, I did it, and straight-way rain fell
from the sky and extinguished the flames of fire, and a light broke
forth above her, and the virgin mary descended with the two little
sons by her side, and the new-born daughter in her arms.  She spoke
kindly to her, and said 'he who repents his sin and acknowledges it,
is forgiven.' Then she gave her the three children, untied her
tongue, and granted her happiness for her whole life.
*
#

The Story of a Youth Who Went Forth to Learn What Fear Was
*
A certain father had two sons, the elder of whom was smart and
sensible, and could do everything, but the younger was stupid and
could neither learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him
they said 'there's a fellow who will give his father some trouble.'
When anything had to be done, it was always the elder who was forced
to do it, but if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late,
or in the night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or any
other dismal place, he answered 'oh, no, father, I'll not go there,
it makes me shudder.' For he was afraid.  Or when stories were told
by the fire at night which made the flesh creep, the listeners
sometimes said 'oh, it makes us shudder.' The younger sat in a corner
and listened with the rest of them, and could not imagine what they
could mean.  'They are always saying 'it makes me shudder, it makes
me shudder,  it does not make me shudder.' Thought he.  'That, too,
must be an art of which I understand nothing.'
*
Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day 'hearken to
me, you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong,
and you too must learn something by which you can earn your bread.
Look how your brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.'
'Well, father, he replied,  'I am quite willing to learn something -
indeed, if it could but be managed, I should like to learn how to
shudder.  I don't understand that at all yet.' The elder brother
smiled when he heard that, and thought to himself 'good God, what a
blockhead that brother of mine is.  He will never be good for
anything as long as he lives.  He who wants to be a sickle must bend
himself betimes.' The father sighed, and answered him 'you shall soon
learn what it is to shudder, but you will not earn your bread by
that.' Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and
the father bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was
so backward in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing.
'Just think,  said he,  'when I asked him how he was going to earn
his bread, he actually wanted to learn to shudder.' 'If that be all,
replied the sexton,  'he can learn that with me.  Send him to me, and
I will soon polish him.' The father was glad to do it, for he thought
'it will train the boy a little.' The sexton therefore took him into
his house, and he had to ring the church bell.  After a day or two,
the sexton awoke him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into
the church tower and ring the bell. 'You shall soon learn what
shuddering is,  thought he, and secretly went there before him, and
when the boy was at the top of the tower and turned round, and was
just going to take hold of the bell rope, he saw a white figure
standing on the stairs opposite the sounding hole.  'Who is there.'
Cried he, but the figure made no reply, and did not move or stir.
'Give an answer,  cried the boy,  'or take yourself off, you have no
business here at night.'
*
The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy might
think he was a ghost.  The boy cried a second time 'what do you want
here. - Speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you down
the steps.' The sexton thought 'he can't mean to be as bad as his
words,  uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone.  Then
the boy called to him for the third time, and as that was also to no
purpose, he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so
that it fell down ten steps and remained lying there in a corner.
Thereupon he rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went
to bed, and fell asleep.  The sexton's wife waited a long time for
her husband, but he did not come back.  At length she became uneasy,
and wakened the boy, and asked 'do you not know where my husband is.
He climbed up the tower before you did.' 'No, I don't know, replied
the boy,  'but someone was standing by the sounding hole on the other
side of the steps, and as he would neither give an answer nor go
away, I took him for a scoundrel, and threw him downstairs.  Just go
there and you will see if it was he.  I should be sorry if it were.'
The woman ran away and found her husband, who was lying moaning in
the corner, and had broken his leg.
*
She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the
boy's father.  'Your boy,  cried she,  'has been the cause of a great
misfortune.  He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke
his leg.  Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.' The
father was terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy.  'What
wicked tricks are these.' Said he,  'the devil must have put them
into your head.' 'Father,  he replied, 'do listen to me.  I am quite
innocent.  He was standing there by night like one intent on doing
evil.  I did not know who it was, and I entreated him three times
either to speak or to go away.' 'Ah,  said the father,  'I have
nothing but unhappiness with you.  Go out of my sight.  I will see
you no more.'
*
'Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day.  Then will
I go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,
understand one art which will support me.' 'Learn what you will,
spoke the father,  'it is all the same to me. Here are fifty talers
for you.  Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one from
whence you come, and who is your father, for I have reason to be
ashamed of you.' 'Yes, father, it shall be as you will.  If you
desire nothing more than that, I can easily keep it in mind.'
*
When day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into his
pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to
himself 'if I could but shudder.  If I could but shudder.' Then a man
approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding
with himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they
could see the gallows, the man said to him 'look, there is the tree
where seven men have married the ropemaker's daughter, and are now
learning how to fly.  Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes,
and you will soon learn how to shudder.' 'If that is all that is
wanted, answered the youth,  'it is easily done, but if I learn how
to shudder as fast as that, you shall have my fifty talers.  Just
come back to me early in the morning.' Then the youth went to the
gallows, sat down beneath it, and waited till evening came. And as he
was cold, he lighted himself a fire, but at midnight the wind blew so
sharply that in spite of his fire, he could not get warm.  And as the
wind knocked the hanged men against each other, and they moved
backwards and forwards, he thought to himself 'if you shiver below by
the fire, how those up above must freeze and suffer.' And as he felt
pity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed up, unbound one of
them after the other, and brought down all seven.  Then he stoked the
fire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm themselves.  But
they sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught their clothes.
So he said 'take care, or I will hang you up again.' The dead men,
however, did not hear, but were quite silent, and let their rags go
on burning.  At this he grew angry, and said 'if you will not take
care, I cannot help you, I will not be burnt with you,  and he hung
them up again each in his turn. Then he sat down by his fire and fell
asleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have
the fifty talers, and said 'well, do you know how to shudder.' 'No,
answered he,  'how should I know.  Those fellows up there did not
open their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old rags
which they had on their bodies get burnt.' Then the man saw that he
would not get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying 'such a
youth has never come my way before.' The youth likewise went his way,
and once more began to mutter to himself 'ah, if I could but shudder.
Ah, if I could but shudder.' A waggoner who was striding behind him
heard this and asked 'who are you.' 'I don't know, answered the
youth.  Then the waggoner asked 'from whence do you come.' 'I know
not.' 'Who is your father.' 'That I may not tell you.' 'What is it
that you are always muttering between your teeth.' 'Ah, replied the
youth,  'I do so wish I could shudder, but no one can teach me how.'
'Enough of your foolish chatter,  said the waggoner.  'Come, go with
me, I will see about a place for you.' The youth went with the
waggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn where they wished
to pass the night.  Then at the entrance of the parlor the youth
again said quite loudly 'if I could but shudder.  If I could but
shudder.' The host who heard this, laughed and said 'if that is your
desire, there ought to be a good opportunity for you here.' 'Ah, be
silent,  said the hostess,  'so many prying persons have already lost
their lives, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as
these should never see the daylight again.' But the youth said
'however difficult it may be, I will learn it.  For this purpose
indeed have I journeyed forth.' He let the host have no rest, until
the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a haunted castle
where any one could very easily learn what shuddering was, if he
would but watch in it for three nights.  The king had promised that
he who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she was
the most beautiful maiden the sun shone on.  Likewise in the castle
lay great treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and these
treasures would then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough.
Already many men had gone into the castle, but as yet none had come
out again.  Then the youth went next morning to the king and said 'if
it be allowed, I will willingly watch three nights in the haunted
castle.' The king looked at him, and as the youth pleased him, he
said 'you may ask for three things to take into the castle with you,
but they must be things without life.' Then he answered 'then I ask
for a fire, a turning lathe, and a cutting-board with the knife.' The
king had these things carried into the castle for him during the day.
When night was drawing near, the youth went up and made himself a
bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-board and knife
beside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe.  'Ah, if I could
but shudder.' Said he,  'but I shall not learn it here either.'
Towards midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowing
it, something cried suddenly from one corner 'au, miau.  How cold we
are.' 'You fools.' Cried he,  'what are you crying about.  If you are
cold, come and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.' And when
he had said that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leap
and sat down on each side of him, and looked savagely at him with
their fiery eyes.  After a short time, when they had warmed
themselves, they said 'comrade, shall we have a game of cards.' 'Why
not.' He replied,  'but just show me your paws.' Then they stretched
out their claws.  'Oh, said he,  'what long nails you have.  Wait, I
must first cut them for you.' Thereupon he seized them by the
throats, put them on the cutting-board and screwed their feet fast.
'I have looked at your fingers,  said he,  'and my fancy for
card-playing has gone, and he struck them dead and threw them out
into the water.  But when he had made away with these two, and was
about to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and corner
came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more and more
of them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled horribly,
and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put it out.
He watched them for a while quietly, but at last when they were going
too far, he seized his cutting-knife, and cried 'away with you,
vermin, and began to cut them down. Some of them ran away, the others
he killed, and threw out into the fish-pond.  When he came back he
fanned the embers of his fire again and warmed himself.  And as he
thus sat, his eyes would keep open no longer, and he felt a desire to
sleep.  Then he looked round and saw a great bed in the corner.
'That is the very thing for me,  said he, and got into it.  When he
was just going to shut his eyes, however, the bed began to move of
its own accord, and went over the whole of the castle. 'That's right,
said he,  'but go faster.' Then the bed rolled on as if six horses
were harnessed to it, up and down, over thresholds and stairs, but
suddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside down, and lay on him like a
mountain.  But he threw quilts and pillows up in the air, got out and
said 'now any one who likes, may drive, and lay down by his fire, and
slept till it was day.  In the morning the king came, and when he saw
him lying there on the ground, he thought the evil spirits had killed
him and he was dead.  Then said he 'after all it is a pity, -- for so
handsome a man.' The youth heard it, got up, and said 'it has not
come to that yet.' Then the king was astonished, but very glad, and
asked how he had fared.  'Very well indeed, answered he,  'one night
is past, the two others will pass likewise.' Then he went to the
innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said 'I never expected
to see you alive again.  Have you learnt how to shudder yet.' 'No,
said he,  'it is all in vain.  If some one would but tell me.' The
second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the
fire, and once more began his old song 'if I could but shudder.' When
midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard, at
first it was low, but it grew louder and louder.  Then it was quiet
for a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came down
the chimney and fell before him.  'Hullo.' Cried he,  'another half
belongs to this.  This is not enough.' Then the uproar began again,
there was a roaring and howling, and the other half fell down
likewise.  'Wait, said he,  'I will just stoke up the fire a little
for you.' When he had done that and looked round again, the two
pieces were joined together, and a hideous man was sitting in his
place. 'That is no part of our bargain,  said the youth,  'the bench
is mine.' The man wanted to push him away, the youth, however, would
not allow that, but thrust him off with all his strength, and seated
himself again in his own place.  Then still more men fell down, one
after the other, they brought nine dead men's legs and two skulls,
and set them up and played at nine-pins with them. The youth also
wanted to play and said 'listen you, can I join you.' 'Yes, if you
have any money.' Money enough, replied he,  'but your balls are not
quite round.' Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and
turned them till they were round.  'There, now they will roll
better.' Said he. 'Hurrah.  Now we'll have fun.' He played with them
and lost some of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything
vanished from his sight.  He lay down and quietly fell asleep.  Next
morning the king came to inquire after him.  'How has it fared with
you this time.' Asked he.  'I have been playing at nine-pins,  he
answered,  'and have lost a couple of farthings.' 'Have you not
shuddered then.' 'What.' Said he,  'I have had a wonderful time.  If
I did but know what it was to shudder.' The third night he sat down
again on his bench and said quite sadly 'if I could but shudder.'
When it grew late, six tall men came in and brought a coffin.  Then
said he 'ha, ha, that is certainly my little cousin, who died only a
few days ago, and he beckoned with his finger, and cried 'come,
little cousin, come.' They placed the coffin on the ground, but he
went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay therein. He felt
his face, but it was cold as ice.  'Wait, said he,  'I will warm you
a little, and went to the fire and warmed his hand and laid it on the
dead man's face, but he remained cold.  Then he took him out, and sat
down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his arms that
the blood might circulate again.  As this also did no good, he
thought to himself 'when two people lie in bed together, they warm
each other, and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay down
by him.  After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began
to move. Then said the youth,  'see, little cousin, have I not warmed
you.' The dead man, however, got up and cried 'now will I strangle
you.' 'What.' Said he,  'is that the way you thank me.  You shall at
once go into your coffin again,  and he took him up, threw him into
it, and shut the lid.  Then came the six men and carried him away
again.  'I cannot manage to shudder, said he.  'I shall never learn
it here as long as I live.' Then a man entered who was taller than
all others, and looked terrible.  He was old, however, and had a long
white beard. 'You wretch,  cried he,  'you shall soon learn what it
is to shudder, for you shall die.' 'Not so fast, replied the youth.
'If I am to die, I shall have to have a say in it.' 'I will soon
seize you, said the fiend.  'Softly, softly, do not talk so big.  I
am as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.' 'We shall see,
said the old man.  'If you are stronger, I will let you go - come, we
will try.' Then he led him by dark passages to a smith's forge, took
an axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.  'I can do
better than that, said the youth, and went to the other anvil.  The
old man placed himself near and wanted to look on, and his white
beard hung down.  Then the youth seized the axe, split the anvil with
one blow, and in it caught the old man's beard.  'Now I have you,
said the youth.  'Now it is your turn to die.' Then he seized an iron
bar and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop,
when he would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe and
let him go.  The old man led him back into the castle, and in a
cellar showed him three chests full of gold. 'Of these, said he,
'one part is for the poor, the other for the king, the third yours.'
In the meantime it struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that
the youth stood in darkness.  'I shall still be able to find my way
out, said he and felt about, found the way into the room, and slept
there by his fire.  Next morning the king came and said 'now you must
have learnt what shuddering is.' 'No, he answered 'what can it be.
My dead cousin was here, and a bearded man came and showed me a great
deal of money down below, but no one told me what it was to shudder.'
'Then, said the king,  'you have saved the castle, and shall marry my
daughter.' 'That is all very well, said he,  'but still I do not know
what it is to shudder.' Then the gold was brought up and the wedding
celebrated, but howsoever much the young king loved his wife, and
however happy he was, he still said always 'if I could but shudder -
if I could but shudder.' And this at last angered her.  Her
waiting-maid said 'I will find a cure for him, he shall soon learn
what it is to shudder.  She went out to the stream which flowed
through the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons brought to
her.
*
At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was to draw the
clothes off him and empty the bucketful of cold water with the
gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would sprawl about
him.  Then he woke up and cried 'oh, what makes me shudder so. - What
makes me shudder so, dear wife.  Ah. Now I know what it is to
shudder.'
*
#

The Wolf and the Seven Little Kids
*
There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One day
she wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she called
all seven to her and said, dear children, I have to go into the
forest, be on your guard against the wolf, if he comes in, he will
devour you all - skin, hair, and everything.  The wretch often
disguises himself, but you will know him at once by his rough voice
and his black feet.  The kids said, dear mother, we will take good
care of ourselves, you may go away without any anxiety.  Then the old
one bleated, and went on her way with an easy mind.
*
It was not long before some one knocked at the house-door and called,
open the door, dear children, your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.  But the little kids knew
that it was the wolf, by the rough voice.  We will not open the door,
cried they, you are not our mother.  She has a soft, pleasant voice,
but your voice is rough, you are the wolf.  Then the wolf went away
to a shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this
and made his voice soft with it. The he came back, knocked at the
door of the house, and called, open the door, dear children, your
mother is here and has brought something back with her for each of
you.  But the wolf had laid his black paws against the window, and
the children saw them and cried, we will not open the door, our
mother has not black feet like you, you are the wolf.  Then the wolf
ran to a baker and said, I have hurt my feet, rub some dough over
them for me.  And when the baker had rubbed his feet over, he ran to
the miller and said, strew some white meal over my feet for me.  The
miller thought to himself, the wolf wants to deceive someone, and
refused, but the wolf said, if you will not do it, I will devour you.
Then the miller was afraid, and made his paws white for him. Truly,
this the way of mankind.
*
So now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked
at it and said, open the door for me, children, your dear little
mother has come home, and has brought every one of you something back
from the forest with her.  The little kids cried, first show us your
paws that we may know if you are our dear little mother.  Then he put
his paws in through the window, and when the kids saw that they were
white, they believed that all he said was true, and opened the door.
But who should come in but the wolf they were terrified and wanted to
hide themselves.  One sprang under the table, the second into the
bed, the third into the stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth
into the cupboard, the sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh
into the clock-case.  But the wolf found them all, and used no great
ceremony, one after the other he swallowed them down his throat.  The
youngest, who was in the clock-case, was the only one he did not
find. When the wolf had satisfied his appetite he took himself off,
laid himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside, and began
to sleep.  Soon afterwards the old goat came home again from the
forest.  Ah.  What a sight she saw there.  The house-door stood wide
open.  The table, chairs, and benches were thrown down, the
washing-bowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts and pillows were
pulled off the bed.  She sought her children, but they were nowhere
to be found.  She called them one after another by name, but no one
answered.  At last, when she caame to the youngest, a soft voice
cried, dear mother, I am in the clock-case.  She took the kid out,
and it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others.
Then you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.
*
At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with
her.  When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree
and snored so loud that the branches shook.  She looked at him on
every side and saw that something was moving and struggling in his
gorged belly.  Ah, heavens, she said, is it possible that my poor
children whom he has swallowed down for his supper, can be still
alive.  Then the kid had to run home and fetch scissors, and a needle
and thread and the goat cut open the monster's stomach, and hardly
had she make one cut, than one little kid thrust its head out, and
when she cut farther, all six sprang out one after another, and were
all still alive, and had suffered no injury whatever, for in his
greediness the monster had swallowed them down whole.  What rejoicing
there was.  They embraced their dear mother, and jumped like a sailor
at his wedding.  The mother, however, said, now go and look for some
big stones, and we will fill the wicked beast's stomach with them
while he is still asleep.  Then the seven kids dragged the stones
thither with all speed, and put as many of them into his stomach as
they could get in, and the mother sewed him up again in the greatest
haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once stirred.
*
When the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep, he got on his
legs, and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he
wanted to go to a well to drink.  But when he began to walk and move
about, the stones in his stomach knocked against each other and
rattled.  Then cried he,  what rumbles and tumbles against my poor
bones.  I thought 'twas six kids,  but it feels like big stones. And
when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, the
heavy stones made him fall in, and he had to drown miserably.  When
the seven kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried
aloud, the wolf is dead.  The wolf is dead, and danced for joy round
about the well with their mother.
*
#

Faithful John
*
There was once upon a time an old king who was ill and thought to
himself 'I am lying on what must be my deathbed.' Then said he 'tell
faithful John to come to me.' Faithful John was his favorite servant,
and was so called, because he had for his whole life long been so
true to him.  When therefore he came beside the bed, the king said to
him 'most faithful John, I feel my end approaching, and have no
anxiety except about my son.  He is still of tender age, and cannot
always know how to guide himself.  If you do not promise me to teach
him everything that he ought to know, and to be his foster-father, I
cannot close my eyes in peace.' Then answered faithful John 'I will
not forsake him, and will serve him with fidelity, even if it should
cost me my life.' At this, the old king said 'now I die in comfort
and peace.' Then he added 'after my death, you shall show him the
whole castle - all the chambers, halls, and vaults, and all the
treasures which lie therein, but the last chamber in the long
gallery, in which is the picture of the princess of the golden
dwelling, shall you not show.  If he sees that picture, he will fall
violently in love with her, and will drop down in a swoon, and go
through great danger for her sake, therefore you must protect him
from that.' And when faithful John had once more given his promise to
the old king about this, the king said no more, but laid his head on
his pillow, and died.
*
When the old king had been carried to his grave, faithful John told
the young king all that he had promised his father on his deathbed,
and said 'this will I assuredly keep, and will be faithful to you as
I have been faithful to him, even if it should cost me my life.' When
the mourning was over, faithful John said to him 'it is now time that
you should see your inheritance.  I will show you your father's
palace.' Then he took him about everywhere, up and down, and let him
see all the riches, and the magnificent apartments, only there was
one room which he did not open, that in which hung the dangerous
picture.  The picture, however, was so placed that when the door was
opened you looked straight on it, and it was so admirably painted
that it seemed to breathe and live, and there was nothing more
charming or more beautiful in the whole world.  The young king
noticed, however, that faithful John always walked past this one
door, and said 'why do you never open this one for me.' 'There is
something within it, he replied,  'which would terrify you.' But the
king answered 'I have seen all the palace, and I want to know what is
in this room also, and he went and tried to break open the door by
force.  Then faithful John held him back and said 'I promised your
father before his death that you should not see that which is in this
chamber, it might bring the greatest misfortune on you and on me.'
'Ah, no, replied the young king,  'if I do not go in, it will be my
certain destruction.  I should have no rest day or night until I had
seen it with my own eyes.  I shall not leave the place now until you
have unlocked the door.'
*
Then faithful John saw that there was no help for it now, and with a
heavy heart and many sighs, sought out the key from the great bunch.
When he opened the door, he went in first, and thought by standing
before him he could hide the portrait so that the king should not see
it in front of him.  But what good was this.  The king stood on
tip-toe and saw it over his shoulder.  And when he saw the portrait
of the maiden, which was so magnificent and shone with gold and
precious stones, he fell fainting to the ground.  Faithful John took
him up, carried him to his bed, and sorrowfully thought 'the
misfortune has befallen us, Lord God, what will be the end of it.'
Then he strengthened him with wine, until he came to himself again.
The first words the king said were 'ah, the beautiful portrait.
Whose it it.' 'That is the princess of the golden dwelling, answered
faithful John.  Then the king continued 'my love for her is so great,
that if all the leaves on all the trees were tongues, they could not
declare it.  I will give my life to win her.  You are my most
faithful John, you must help me.
*
The faithful servant considered within himself for a long time how to
set about the matter, for it was difficult even to obtain a sight of
the king's daughter.  At length he thought of a way, and said to the
king 'everything which she has about her is of gold - tables, chairs,
dishes, glasses, bowls, and household furniture.  Among your
treasures are five tons of gold, let one of the goldsmiths of the
kingdom fashion these into all manner of vessels and utensils, into
all kinds of birds, wild beasts and strange animals, such as may
please her, and we will go there with them and try our luck.'
*
The king ordered all the goldsmiths to be brought to him, and they
had to work night and day until at last the most splendid things were
prepared.  When everything was stowed on board a ship, faithful John
put on the dress of a merchant, and the king was forced to do the
same in order to make himself quite unrecognizable.  Then they sailed
across the sea, and sailed on until they came to the town wherein
dwelt the princess of the golden dwelling.
*
Faithful John bade the king stay behind on the ship, and wait for
him.  'Perhaps I shall bring the princess with me,  said he,
'therefore see that everything is in order, have the golden vessels
set out and the whole ship decorated.' Then he gathered together in
his apron all kinds of golden things, went on shore and walked
straight to the royal palace. When he entered the courtyard of the
palace, a beautiful girl was standing there by the well with two
golden buckets in her hand, drawing water with them.  And when she
was just turning round to carry away the sparkling water she saw the
stranger, and asked who he was.  So he answered 'I am a merchant, and
opened his apron, and let her look in.  Then she cried 'oh, what
beautiful golden things.' And put her pails down and looked at the
golden wares one after the other.  Then said the girl 'the princess
must see these, she has such great pleasure in golden things, that
she will buy all you have.' She took him by the hand and led him
upstairs, for she was the waiting-maid. When the king's daughter saw
the wares, she was quite delighted and said 'they are so beautifully
worked, that I will buy them all from you.' But faithful John said 'I
am only the servant of a rich merchant.  The things I have here are
not to be compared with those my master has in his ship.  They are
the most beautiful and valuable things that have ever been made in
gold.' When she wanted to have everything brought up to her, he said
'there are so many of them that it would take a great many days to do
that, and so many rooms would be required to exhibit them, that your
house is not big enough.' Then her curiosity and longing were still
more excited, until at last she said 'conduct me to the ship, I will
go there myself, and behold the treasures of your master.' At this
faithful John was quite delighted, and led her to the ship, and when
the king saw her, he perceived that her beauty was even greater than
the picture had represented it to be, and thought no other than that
his heart would burst in twain.  Then she boarded the ship, and the
king led her within.  Faithful John, however, remained with the
helmsman, and ordered the ship to be pushed off, saying 'set all
sail, till it fly like a bird in the air.' Within, the king showed
her the golden vessels, every one of them, also the wild beasts and
strange animals.  Many hours went by whilst she was seeing
everything, and in her delight she did not observe that the ship was
sailing away.  After she had looked at the last, she thanked the
merchant and wanted to go home, but when she came to the side of the
ship, she saw that it was on the high seas far from land, and
hurrying onwards with all sail set.  'Ah,  cried she in her alarm, 'I
am betrayed.  I am carried away and have fallen into the power of a
merchant - I would rather die.' The king, however, seized her hand,
and said 'I am not a merchant.  I am a king, and of no meaner origin
than you are, and if I have carried you away with subtlety, that has
come to pass because of my exceeding great love for you.  The first
time that I looked on your portrait, I fell fainting to the ground.'
When the princess of the golden dwelling heard this, she was
comforted, and her heart was drawn to him, so that she willingly
consented to be his wife. It so happened, while they were sailing
onwards over the deep sea, that faithful John, who was sitting on the
fore part of the vessel, making music, saw three ravens in the air,
which came flying towards them.  At this he stopped playing and
listened to what they were saying to each other, for that he well
understood.  One cried 'oh, there he is carrying home the princess of
the golden dwelling.' 'Yes, replied the second,  'but he has not got
her yet.' Said the third 'but he has got her, she is sitting beside
him in the ship.' Then the first began again, and cried 'what good
will that do him.  When they reach land a chestnut horse will leap
forward to meet him, and the prince will want to mount it, but if he
does that, it will run away with him, and rise up into the air, and
he will never see his maiden more.' Spoke the second 'but is there no
escape.' 'Oh, yes, if someone else mounts it swiftly, and takes out
the pistol which he will find in its holster, and shoots the horse
dead, the young king is saved.  But who knows that. And whosoever
does know it, and tells it to him, will be turned to stone from the
toe to the knee.' Then said the second 'I know more than that, even
if the horse be killed, the young king will still not keep his bride.
When they go into the castle together, a wrought bridal garment will
be lying there in a dish, and looking as if it were woven of gold and
silver,  it is, however, nothing but sulphur and pitch, and if he put
it on, it will burn him to the very bone and marrow.' Said the third
'is there no escape at all.' 'Oh, yes, replied the second,  'if any
one with gloves on seizes the garment and throws it into the fire and
burns it, the young king will be saved.  But what good will that do.
Whosoever knows it and tells it to him, half his body will become
stone from the knee to the heart.' Then said the third 'I know still
more, even if the bridal garment be burnt, the young king will still
not have his bride. After the wedding, when the dancing begins and
the young queen is dancing, she will suddenly turn pale and fall down
as if dead, and if some one does not lift her up and draw three drops
of blood from her right breast and spit them out again, she will die.
But if any one who knows that were to declare it, he would become
stone from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot.' When the
ravens had spoken of this together, they flew onwards, and faithful
John had well understood everything, but from that time forth he
became quiet and sad, for if he concealed what he had heard from his
master, the latter would be unfortunate, and if he disclosed it to
him, he himself must sacrifice his life.  At length, however, he said
to himself 'I will save my master, even if it bring destruction on
myself.' When therefore they came to shore, all happened as had been
foretold by the ravens, and a magnificent chestnut horse sprang
forward.  'Good, said the king,  'he shall carry me to my palace,
and was about to mount it when faithful John got before him, jumped
quickly on it, drew the pistol out of the holster, and shot the
horse.  Then the other attendants of the king, who were not very fond
of faithful John, cried 'how shameful to kill the beautiful animal,
that was to have carried the king to his palace.' But the king said
'hold your peace and leave him alone, he is my most faithful John.
Who knows what good may come of this.' They went into the palace, and
in the hall there stood a dish, and therein lay the bridal garment
looking no otherwise than as if it were made of gold and silver.  The
young king went towards it and was about to take hold of it, but
faithful John pushed him away, seized it with gloves on, carried it
quickly to the fire and burnt it.  The other attendants again began
to murmur, and said 'behold, now he is even burning the king's bridal
garment.' But the young king said 'who knows what good he may have
done, leave him alone, he is my most faithful John.' And now the
wedding was solemnized - the dance began, and the bride also took
part in it, then faithful John was watchful and looked into her face,
and suddenly she turned pale and fell to the ground as if she were
dead.  On this he ran hastily to her, lifted her up and bore her into
a chamber - then he laid her down, and knelt and sucked the three
drops of blood from her right breast, and spat them out.  Immediately
she breathed again and recovered herself, but the young king had seen
this, and being ignorant why faithful John had done it, was angry and
cried 'throw him into a dungeon.' Next morning faithful John was
condemned, and led to the gallows, and when he stood on high, and was
about to be executed, he said 'every one who has to die is permitted
before his end to make one last speech, may I too claim the right.'
'Yes, answered the king,  'it shall be granted unto you.' Then said
faithful John 'I am unjustly condemned, and have always been true to
you,  and he related how he had hearkened to the conversation of the
ravens when on the sea, and how he had been obliged to do all these
things in order to save his master.  Then cried the king 'oh, my most
faithful John.  Pardon, pardon - bring him down.' But as faithful
John spoke the last word he had fallen down lifeless and become a
stone.
*
Thereupon the king and the queen suffered great anguish, and the king
said 'ah, how ill I have requited great fidelity.' And ordered the
stone figure to be taken up and placed in his bedroom beside his bed.
And as often as he looked on it he wept and said 'ah, if I could
bring you to life again, my most faithful John.'
*
Some time passed and the queen bore twins, two sons who grew fast and
were her delight.  Once when the queen was at church and the father
was sitting with his two children playing beside him, he looked at
the stone figure again, sighed, and full of grief he said 'ah, if I
could but bring you to life again, my most faithful John.' Then the
stone began to speak and said 'you can bring me to life again if you
will use for that purpose what is dearest to you.' Then cried the
king 'I will give everything I have in the world for you.' The stone
continued 'if you will cut off the heads of your two children with
your own hand, and sprinkle me with their blood, I shall be restored
to life.'
*
The king was terrified when he heard that he himself must kill his
dearest children, but he thought of faithful John's great fidelity,
and how he had died for him, drew his sword, and with his own hand
cut off the children's heads.  And when he had smeared the stone with
their blood, life returned to it, and faithful John stood once more
safe and healthy before him. He said to the king 'your truth shall
not go unrewarded, and took the heads of the children, put them on
again, and rubbed the wounds with their blood, at which they became
whole again immediately, and jumped about, and went on playing as if
nothing had happened.  Then the king was full of joy, and when he saw
the queen coming he hid faithful John and the two children in a great
cupboard.  When she entered, he said to her 'have you been praying in
the church.' 'Yes, answered she, 'but I have constantly been thinking
of faithful John and what misfortune has befallen him through us.'
Then said he 'dear wife, we can give him his life again, but it will
cost us our two little sons, whom we must sacrifice.' The queen
turned pale, and her heart was full of terror, but she said 'we owe
it to him, for his great fidelity.' Then the king was rejoiced that
she thought as he had thought, and went and opened the cupboard, and
brought forth faithful John and the children, and said 'God be
praised, he is delivered, and we have our little sons again also,
and told her how everything had occurred.  Then they dwelt together
in much happiness until their death.
*
#
